---
layout: single
title: NFT WTF?!?
date: 2021-03-27
comments: true
---

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/eCbopXdpSoY"
 title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0"
 allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
 style="padding-bottom:10px;border:3px white solid;" allowfullscreen>
</iframe>

There's been a lot of noise about NFTs lately, mostly related to the
[absurd sums of money](https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/11/22325054/beeple-christies-nft-sale-cost-everydays-69-million)
that some of these assets are fetching. Like most concepts related to blockchain, however, the real
purpose of NFTs relates to creating systems that _resist_ the tendency for people to accumulate
disproportionate power (e.g. money). The fact of the matter is, the capabilities that NFTs provide
are fairly straightforward, and focusing on the _human_ reasons for such technologies can make them
seem much more approachable. Furthermore, since most of the news about NFTs has to do with artists
and other creators using blockchain technologies to support themselves, it's a relatively simple and
relatable topic that can be used to better understand how blockchain technologies are about more
than just cryptocurrency; in fact, they may even change the world. Sound interesting? Keep reading
to learn more!

[NFTs are non-fungible tokens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-fungible_token), which is a fancy
way of saying "something that is unique". An asset class is described as "fungible" if each item in
the class is equivalent. A classic example of a fungible asset class is currency - i.e., all $1
bills are equivalent. Another way of describing this equivalence is that there are not any
_attributes_ that can be used to meaningfully distinguish fungible assets, like $1 bills.
_Non_-fungible asset types, on the other hand, have attributes that distinguish individual assets
from one another. The attributes of non-fungible assets are important because they add essential
context or meaning to the asset. Property deeds are a good example of a type of non-fungible asset -
although each individual deed has the same _type_ of attributes (e.g. address, size), the specific
_values_ of these attributes meaningfully distinguish each deed from one another.

So, ostensibly speaking, the concept of NFTs is just an idea that people use to describe unique
assets. In reality, however, the term "NFT" is used to describe assets that are both unique _and_
[digital](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_asset) (i.e. existing within a computing system as
opposed to "in real life"). Furthermore, NFTs are typically associated with unique digital assets
that are stored on a _blockchain_. So what does the term "NFT" _really_ mean?

First of all, what are some common examples of digital assets? One such example is online accounts.
Think about the process of creating an online account - usually, it's necessary to fill out a form
in order to provide a unique combination of values for some set of attributes, like username and
password. Once this account has been created, people typically describe it as a type of asset that
is "owned" by its creator. In fact, Twitter accounts, although they do not exist "in real life",
have been
[bought and sold as assets](https://www.thesun.co.uk/tech/6103393/twitter-rarest-handles-names-worth-value-money/)
for years now.

Most digital asset capabilities that exist today are provided by monolithic centers of authority.
Consider the example of a social media account - in this case, the "owner" of the account must
_trust_ the social media platform to keep track of their username, password, and possibly other
personal data, such as their address or credit card number. In this way, the social media platform
becomes a monolithic center of authority by serving as the root of an entire "web of trust" on which
the capabilities of the community are built. Although these centers of authority _may_ have the best
of intentions to
"[not be evil](https://gizmodo.com/google-removes-nearly-all-mentions-of-dont-be-evil-from-1826153393)",
the vulnerabilities they expose are proven by every new
[hack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashley_Madison_data_breach) or
[password leak](https://cybernews.com/news/largest-compilation-of-emails-and-passwords-leaked-free/)
that hits the news.

The "modern" Internet is rife with such monolithic centers of authority for the simple reason that
the network infrastructure on which it is built was not designed with the concept of trust in mind.
The Internet as it's known today was
[designed in the late-1960s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_protocol_suite#History) with the
intention of broadly facilitating communication between well-known but disparate systems, _not_ with
the intention of securing (or establishing trust) in the data that was being communicated. In order
to achieve this goal, two decisions were made. First, the infrastructure on which the Internet is
built was designed to run on "two tin cans and a string". At the same time, all "intelligence" that
was related to anything other than transmitting data (such as _securing_ that data) was pushed out
to the well-known, trusted "edges" of the network. Although this infrastructure may have served it's
purpose at the time, it was simply never designed to support the type of vital and global personal
services that the Internet is used for today.

This is where [blockchain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain) comes in. Blockchain is a
next-generation network infrastructure that was designed to support the types of capabilities that
are currently provided by the Internet. It's not within the scope of this writing to explain _how_
blockchain technologies make this happen, but by using cutting-edge cryptography and concepts like
game theory, blockchains allow people to form communities that _support themselves_, as opposed to
relying on monolithic centers of authority for support.

So, an NFT is a unique digital asset that exists on a platform designed to resist monolithic centers
of authority - what does this all have to do with artists and other creators? Although people have
been using computers to create digital art since at least
[the 1950s](http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/a/computer-art-history/), the network
infrastructure of the Internet makes it difficult for digital creators to support themselves for at
least two reasons. First, how can one prove digital uniqueness or authenticity? With the modern
Internet, the only way is by relying on a monolithic center of authority, like how the users of a
social media platform trust that the platform will maintain the uniqueness and authenticity of their
usernames. Furthermore, how can digital creators transact with a global audience in order to sell
their work and support themselves? Once again this devolves to a reliance on monolithic centers of
authority, as both buyer and seller typically insist upon a trusted third-party for payment
processing and to guarantee the sale. Although these systems may seem "convenient", they create
overhead for both buyers and sellers, as well as singular points of vulnerability that are
constantly susceptible to attack or simple human error.

NFTs allow digital creators to prove and maintain the uniqueness and authenticity of their work in a
way that is both more secure _and_ more independent than current systems. Furthermore, the
blockchain networks on which NFTs exist allow community members to safely and securely transact with
one another without the need to rely on (and pay) trusted payment processors. This is just _one_
example of the types of novel forms of human interactions that are enabled by blockchain
technologies. Just like the invention of computers created mechanisms for
[new types of artistic expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generative_art), it's possible that
the capabilities of blockchain networks will result in new types of human interaction that have yet
to even be imagined.

Sound interesting? Inspired yet? Want to learn more and start getting involved? Hopefully! If so,
this is just the beginning. There are many interesting blockchain networks out there, but one of the
most exciting is the [Kusama Network](https://kusama.network/), the "wild cousin" of the more
serious [Polkadot Network](https://polkadot.network/). There are lots of different ways to get
involved in these communities and some [great resources](https://wiki.polkadot.network/) out there
to help get started. Comment below with questions or suggestions for future writings!

## Glossary

- NFT (non-fungible token): a unique asset
- Blockchain: a way for people to work together without relying on trusted third-parties like
  administrators, arbiters, brokers, or moderators
